---
title: Beyond Seasonal Pictures at Bundoran
objectid: icp-0232
---

With a population of 2,116 in 1911, Bundoran was a Victorian seaside resort that attracted tourists to the northwest Atlantic for a brief summer season, and the travelling show people who provided them with entertainment in local halls and temporary premises. Some of the latter seem to have longer residencies before a purpose-built cinema was constructed. Names associated with the town include such well-known travelling showmen as Bracey Daniells and John Monson. 

At the end of February 1912, for example, the Kinematograph and Lantern Weekly published details of Monson’s Easter tour: “Monson’s Moving Picture Co., open their grand Irish motor tour on Easter Monday and intend visiting every town of importance in the country. The company will be accompanied by a Brass Band, which will parade each town daily seated in a magnificent motor chariot. They have secured a fine hall in Bundoran, Co. Donegal and two shows will be given daily of pictures and variety” (29 Feb. 1912: 980). 

Several ads and short items for the seasonal Cinema de Luxe at Bundoran’s Hamilton Hall appeared in the Ulster Herald in late June and July 1913. These, unfortunately, include details neither of programming beyond the mention of “first-class pictures” nor of the people involved (“Cinema de Luxe”). 

### St Patrick's Hall

In January 1920, the Donegal Democrat reported that a Cork company planned the erection of a cinema hall costing £10,000 in Bundoran. The local businessmen involved were named as Thomas Gorman of the Central Hotel, P. Meehan, J. Conlan and E. Passmore (23 Jan. 1920).   
